Document transaction fees (#288)
substrate-developer-hub/substrate-developer-hub.github.io: docs/conceptual/runtime/weight.md

---
title: Transaction Weight
---

When transactions are submitted to a blockchain, they are executed by the nodes
in the network. To be economically sustainable, nodes charge a fee to execute a
transaction that must be covered by the submitter of the transaction. The cost
to execute transactions could vary over orders of magnitude, and thus Substrate
provides a flexible mechanism for characterizing the total, presumably minimum,
cost of a transaction in order to be included into a block.

> Furthermore, a number of resources in any chain can be limited by definition

Author: "limited by definition" seems weird to me. Where is such defining happening? I might suggest

```diff
-  a number of resources in any chain can be limited by definition
+  a number of resources in any chain can be physically scarce
```

> Furthermore, a number of resources in any chain can be limited by definition

Reviewer: I think definition is better. Physically is for sure vague for instance CPU and memory is physical but _state_ is kinda not. I want to imply that you can define more stuff as _limited weight_, I think _by def,_ fits that better.

`$x` can access and examine the arguments of the dispatch. Nonetheless, a weight
calculation should always:
- Be computable __ahead of dispatch__. A block producer, or a validator, should
  be able to examine the weight of a dispatchable before actually deciding to
  accept it or not.
- While not enforced, calculating the weight should not consume much resource
  itself. It does not make much sense to spend almost the same amount of time as
  dispatching a transaction to estimate how much weight it will consume. Thus,
  weight computation should typically be very fast, much faster than
  dispatching. This is analogous to a `poll()` function of the `Future` trait.
  It really doesn't make sense to poll a future if it is going to stall us until
  the future itself is resolved; A sensible `poll` must return fast.
- Finally, if a transaction is very variable in the amount of resources it
  consumes, it should manually prevent restrict certain dispatches through any
  means that makes sense to that particular chain. An example of such dispatches
  in substrate is the call to a smart contract (todo: link when this is

>   implemented).

Reviewer 2: That sounds like the right thing to do. Although, I still consider the "next" docs to be a roughish playground.

I am not against merging to them with a TODO, and then doing a final pass to clean up TODOs before we make it the release version of our docs.

I have been doing this with the NEXT STEPS because its hard to know all the things we can reference to, until we write all the docs and make recipes and stuff.

>   implemented).

Reviewer 3: Let's put comments inside `<!--html comment tags-->` so that we can search for them but they don't show up on the site.

Given the above details, one can write their own weight computation function,
`$x` in the above listing, to determine the weight of dispatchable. The
programming details of doing this is beyond the scope of this document. For more
information on that, refer to:
- the [weight
  module's](https://crates.parity.io/sr_primitives/weights/index.html)
  documentation in substrate-primitives.
- the
  [`srml-example`](https://github.com/paritytech/substrate/blob/master/srml/example/src/lib.rs)
  module and the inline documentation. Skim the code for `#[weight]` attributes
  and all the related documentations.
- the section on weights in Substrate recipes. TODO

The system module is responsible for accumulating the weight of each block as it
gets executed and making sure that it does not exceed the limit. The
transaction-payment module is responsible for interpreting these weights and
deducting fees based upon them.

## More on Weights: Block Weight and Length Limit

Aside from affecting the fees, the main purpose of the weight system is to
prevent a block from being too filled with transactions. The system module,

> while processing blocks≠transactions within a block, accumulates both the total

Reviewer: just a typo :D

length of the block (sum of encoded transactions in number of bytes) and the
total weight of the blocks. At any points, if these numbers surpass the limits,
no further transactions are accepted to the block. These limits are defined in
[`MaximumBlockLength`](https://crates.parity.io/srml_system/trait.Trait.html#associatedtype.MaximumBlockLength)
and
[`MaximumBlockWeight`](https://crates.parity.io/srml_system/trait.Trait.html#associatedtype.MaximumBlockLength)
respectively.

One important note about these limits is that a ratio of them are reserved for

> the `Operational` dispatch class. This rule applies to both of the limits and

Author: ```diff
- One important note about these limits is that a ratio of them are reserved for
- the `Operational` dispatch class. This rule applies to both of the limits and
+ One important note about these limits is that a portion of them are reserved for
+ extrinsics with the `Operational` dispatch class. This rule applies to both of the limits and
```

the ratio can be found in
[`AvailableBlockRatio`](https://crates.parity.io/srml_system/trait.Trait.html#associatedtype.AvailableBlockRatio).
For example, if the block length limit is 1 mega bytes and the ratio is set the
80%, all transactions can fill the first 800 kilo bytes of the block while the
last 200 can only be filled by the operation class.

## Frequent Questions

> _Some operations get more expensive as storage grows and shrinks. How can the
> weight system represent that?_

As mentioned, weight should be known _readily_ and _ahead of dispatch_. Peeking
the storage and analyzing it just to determine how much weight might be consumed
does not fit this definition quite well. In this case the implementation of the
dispatch should take the state of the change into account and manually take
extra fees, bonds or take any other measures to make sure that the transaction
is safe.

> 

Author: @kianenigma I had also thought of this solution. What do you think?

The transaction contains, as a parameter, the expected value from storage. Since the value is a parameter, the weight can be calculated in advance. When the transaction is dispatched, it `ensure!`s that the parameter actually does match the storage value.

Reviewer: Yeah someone can do that but we can't in any way for example force all transactions to send some pre-fetched storage items to help with weight. A user can craft a custom function in decl_module to work in such a way and, well, good luck with them. I will note this maybe as an example. you can also add it yourself if you feel like it,

> _Is the weighting function open to change through governance short of a
> runtime upgrade?_

Yes, it is part of a runtime itself, hence any runtime upgrade is an upgrade to

> the weight system as well. A upgrade can just update weight functions if needed.

Author: "short of a runtime upgrade" means _without_ a runtime upgrade. So what if rephrase like this.

```diff
- > _Is the weighting function open to change through governance short of a
- > runtime upgrade?_
- Yes, it is part of a runtime itself, hence any runtime upgrade is an upgrade to
- the weight system as well. A upgrade can just update weight functions if needed.
+ > _Is the weighting function open to change through governance?_
+ Yes, the weighting function is part of the runtime, hence any runtime upgrade is
+ an upgrade to the weight system as well. An upgrade can change _only_ the
+ weight functions if needed.
```

Reviewer: I think another type of _sort of a runtime upgrade_ :D

## Next Steps

### Learn More

> TODO

Author: Link to fees article

### Examples

> TODO

Author: Do we want inline code examples here? We could copy one from the recipes and then link there for more.

Reviewer: I will link for sure

defining it as a vague type that is encodable. `srml-example` contains an example of how to do 
this. Just note that, in that case, your code would roughly look like:

```rust
struct CustomWeight;
impl WeighData<(&u32, &u64)> for CustomWeight {
    fn weigh_data(&self, target: (&u32, &u64)) -> Weight {
        ...
    }
}

// given dispatch:
decl_module! {
    fn foo(a: u32, b: u64) { ... }
}
```

This means that `CustomWeight` can only be used in conjunction with a dispatch with a particular
signature `(u32, u64)`, as opposed to `LenWeight`, which can be used with anything because they 
don't make any strict assumptions about `<T>`.

## Frequently Asked Questions

> _Some operations get more expensive as storage grows and shrinks. How can the weight system
> represent that?_

As mentioned, weight should be known _readily_ and _ahead of dispatch_. Peeking the storage and
analyzing it just to determine how much weight might be consumed does not fit this definition quite
well. In this case, the implementation of the dispatch should take the state of the change into
account and manually take extra fees or bonds or take any other measures to make sure that the
transaction is safe.

> > _Is the weighing function open to change through governance or any sort of a runtime upgrade?_

Reviewer 3: Actually this was correct originally. [Weighting](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Weighting) means exactly this: to calculate weights.
```suggestion
> _Is the weighting function open to change through governance or any sort of a runtime upgrade?_
```

---
title: Transaction Weight
---

A number of resources in any chain can be limited by definition, such as time, memory and
computation. A mechanism should exist to prevent individual resource-consuming components of the
chain, including but not limited to dispatchable functions, from consume too much of any of the
mentioned resources. This concept is represented in substrate runtime by weights. Furthermore, consuming
some weights could optionally incur some fee.

> The fee implications of the weight system is covered in the [Fee Developer document](). This

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The fee implications of the weight system is covered in the [Fee Developer document](development/module/fees.md). This
```

document mostly covers the concept of weights.

## Transaction Weight

> As mentioned, weights can technically refer to, or represent, numerous _limited_ resources. A custom

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Weights represent the _limited_ resources of your blockchain, for example computational cycles, memory, storage, etc... A custom
```

I dunno how else to say it, but the language throughout is a little verbose and cryptic when I think it could be more direct and solid.

Like rather than "can technically refer to, or represent", just say it represents. Anyway, this is not something that I expect you to clean up, just want to hear if you have feedback about this.

implementation may use complex structures to demonstrate this. At the time of this writing,
substrate weights are simply a [numeric
value](/rustdocs/master/sr_primitives/weights/type.Weight.html). Each dispatchable function
is given a weight using the `#[weight = $x]` annotation, where `$x` is some function capable of
determining the weight of the dispatch. `$x` can access and examine the arguments of the dispatch.
Nonetheless, a weight calculation should always:
- Be computable __ahead of dispatch__. A block producer, or a validator, should be able to examine
  the weight of a dispatchable before actually deciding to accept it or not.
- While not enforced, calculating the weight should not consume much resource itself. It does not
  make sense to consume similar resources computing a transaction's weight as would be spent while
  executing it. Thus, weight computation should typically be very fast, much faster than
  dispatching.
- Finally, if a transaction's resource consumption varies over a wide range, it should manually

>   prevent restrict certain dispatches through any means that makes sense to that particular chain.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
  prevent certain dispatches through any means that makes sense to that particular chain.
```

prevent or restrict?

>   An example of such dispatches in substrate is the call to a smart contract (todo: link when this

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
  An example of such dispatches in Substrate is the call to a smart contract (todo: link when this
```

Make sure Substrate is capitalized.

  is implemented).

The system module is responsible for accumulating the weight of each block as it gets executed and
making sure that it does not exceed the limit. The transaction-payment module is responsible for
interpreting these weights and deducting fees based upon them.

## Block Weight and Length Limit

Aside from affecting the fees, the main purpose of the weight system is to prevent a block from

> being too filled with transactions. The system module, while processing transactions within a block,

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
being filled with too many transactions. The system module, while processing transactions within a block,
```

> accumulates both the total length of the block (sum of encoded transactions in number of bytes) and

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
accumulates both the total length of the block (sum of encoded transactions in bytes) and
```

> the total weight of the blocks. At any points, if these numbers surpass the limits, no further

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
the total weight of the blocks. If at any point these numbers surpass the limit, no further
```

transactions are accepted to the block. These limits are defined in
[`MaximumBlockLength`](/rustdocs/master/srml_system/trait.Trait.html#associatedtype.MaximumBlockLength)
and
[`MaximumBlockWeight`](/rustdocs/master/srml_system/trait.Trait.html#associatedtype.MaximumBlockLength)
respectively.

One important note about these limits is that a ratio of them are reserved for the `Operational`
dispatch class. This rule applies to both of the limits and the ratio can be found in
[`AvailableBlockRatio`](/rustdocs/master/srml_system/trait.Trait.html#associatedtype.AvailableBlockRatio).

> For example, if the block length limit is 1 mega bytes and the ratio is set the 80%, all

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
For example, if the block length limit is 1 megabyte and the ratio is set the 80%, all
```

> transactions can fill the first 800 kilo bytes of the block while the last 200 can only be filled by

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
transactions can fill the first 800 kilobytes of the block while the last 200 can only be filled by
```

the operation class.

## Custom Weight Implementation

> Implementation a custom weight calculation function can vary from _very easy_ to _super

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Implementation a custom weight calculation function can vary in complexity.
```

> complicated_. The `SimpleDispatchInfo` struct provided by substrate is fairly one of the easiest

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The `SimpleDispatchInfo` struct provided by Substrate is fairly simple.
```

> appraoches. Anything more sophisticated would require a bit more work.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
```

Any weight calculation function must provide two trait implementations:
  - [`WeightData<T>`]: To determine the weight of the dispatch.
  - [`ClassifyDispatch<T>`]: To determine the class of the dispatch. See the enum definition for
    more information on dispatch classes. This struct can then be used with `#[weight]` annotation.

> Substrate then bundles then output information of the two traits into [`DispatchInfo`] struct and

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Substrate then bundles the output information of the two traits into the [`DispatchInfo`] struct and
```

provides it by implementing the [`GetDispatchInfo`] for all `Call` variants, and opaque extrinsic
types. This is used internally by the system and executive module; you won't use it most likely.

Both `ClassifyDispatch` and `WeightData` are generic over `T` which gets resolved into the tuple of
all dispatch arguments except for the origin. To demonstrate, we will craft a struct that calculates

> the weight as `m * len(args)` where `m` is a given multiplier and `args` is the concatenated tuple

Reviewer 2: You get pretty heavy into implementation details here. I think this starts to become a developer doc at this point...

impl<T: Encode> WeighData<T> for LenWeight {
    fn weigh_data(&self, target: T) -> Weight {
        let multiplier = self.0;
        let encoded_len = target.encode().len() as u32;
        multiplier * encoded_len
    }
}

impl<T: Encode> ClassifyDispatch<T> for LenWeight {
    fn classify_dispatch(&self, target: T) -> DispatchClass {
        let encoded_len = target.encode().len() as u32;
        if encoded_len > 100 {
            DispatchClass::Operational
        } else {
            DispatchClass::Normal
        }
    }
}
```

A weight calculator function can also be entirely coerced to the final type of the argument, instead
of defining it as a vague type that is encodable. This is also possible and `srml-example` contains
an example of how to do this. Just note that in that case your code would roughly look like:

```rust

struct CustomWeight;
impl WeighData<(&u32, &u64)> for CustomWeight {
    fn weigh_data(&self, target: (&u32, &u64)) -> Weight {
        ...
    }
}

// given dispatch:
decl_module! {
    fn foo(a: u32, b: u64) { ... }
}
```

which means **`CustomWeight` can only be used in conjunction with a dispatch with a particular

> signature (u32, u64)**, as opposed to `LenWeight` which can be used with literally anything because

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
signature (u32, u64)**, as opposed to `LenWeight` which can be used with anything because
```

they don't make any strict assumptions about `<T>`.

> ## Frequent Questions

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
## Frequently Asked Questions
```

> _Some operations get more expensive as storage grows and shrinks. How can the weight system
> represent that?_

As mentioned, weight should be known _readily_ and _ahead of dispatch_. Peeking the storage and
analyzing it just to determine how much weight might be consumed does not fit this definition quite
well. In this case the implementation of the dispatch should take the state of the change into
account and manually take extra fees, bonds or take any other measures to make sure that the
transaction is safe.

> > _Is the weighting function open to change through governance or any sort of a runtime upgrade?_

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
> _Is the weighing function open to change through governance or any sort of a runtime upgrade?_
```

Yes, it is part of a runtime itself, hence any runtime upgrade is an upgrade to the weight system as
well. A upgrade can just update weight functions if needed.

## Next Steps

### Learn More

- Substrate Recipes contains examples of both [custom weights](https://github.com/substrate-developer-hub/recipes/tree/master/kitchen/modules/weights) and custom [WeightToFee](https://github.com/substrate-developer-hub/recipes/tree/master/kitchen/runtimes/weight-fee-runtime).
- The [srml-example](https://github.com/paritytech/substrate/blob/master/srml/example/src/lib.rs) module

> 

Reviewer 2: Please add an examples section, even if it just links to SRML-Example

---
title: Transaction Weight
---

A number of resources in any chain can be limited by definition, such as time, memory and
computation. A mechanism should exist to prevent individual resource-consuming components of the
chain, including but not limited to dispatchable functions, from consume too much of any of the

> mentioned resources. This concept is represented in substrate by weights. Furthermore, consuming

Reviewer 4: Not in substrate, but in SRML?

Reviewer: true 👍

Reviewer: ```suggestion
mentioned resources. This concept is represented in substrate runtime by weights. Furthermore, consuming
```
